¹ Cast your bread on the waters;
    for you shall find it after many days.
² Give a portion to seven, yes, even to eight;
    for you don’t know what evil will be on the earth.
³ If the clouds are full of rain, they empty themselves on the earth;
    and if a tree falls toward the south, or toward the north,
    in the place where the tree falls, there shall it be.
⁴ He who observes the wind won’t sow;
    and he who regards the clouds won’t reap.
⁵ As you don’t know what is the way of the wind,
    nor how the bones grow in the womb of her who is with child;
    even so you don’t know the work of God who does all.
⁶ In the morning sow your seed,
    and in the evening don’t withhold your hand;
    for you don’t know which will prosper, whether this or that,
    or whether they both will be equally good.
⁷ Truly the light is sweet,
    and it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to see the sun.
⁸ Yes, if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in them all;
    but let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many.
    All that comes is vanity.
⁹ Rejoice, young man, in your youth,
    and let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth,
    and walk in the ways of your heart,
    and in the sight of your eyes;
    but know that for all these things God will bring you into judgment.
¹⁰ Therefore remove sorrow from your heart,
    and put away evil from your flesh;
    for youth and the dawn of life are vanity.
¹ Remember also your Creator in the days of your youth,
    before the evil days come, and the years draw near,
    when you will say, “I have no pleasure in them;”
² Before the sun, the light, the moon, and the stars are darkened,
    and the clouds return after the rain;
³ in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble,
    and the strong men shall bow themselves,
    and the grinders cease because they are few,
    and those who look out of the windows are darkened,
⁴ and the doors shall be shut in the street;
    when the sound of the grinding is low,
    and one shall rise up at the voice of a bird,
    and all the daughters of music shall be brought low;
⁵ yes, they shall be afraid of heights,
    and terrors will be on the way;
    and the almond tree shall blossom,
    and the grasshopper shall be a burden,
    and desire shall fail;
    because man goes to his everlasting home,
    and the mourners go about the streets:
⁶ before the silver cord is severed,
    or the golden bowl is broken,
    or the pitcher is broken at the spring,
    or the wheel broken at the cistern,
⁷ and the dust returns to the earth as it was,
    and the spirit returns to God who gave it.
⁸     “Vanity of vanities,” says the Preacher.
    “All is vanity!” 
⁹ Further, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge. Yes, he pondered, sought out, and set in order many proverbs. ¹⁰ The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was written blamelessly, words of truth. ¹¹ The words of the wise are like goads; and like nails well fastened are words from the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. ¹² Furthermore, my son, be admonished: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh. 
¹³ This is the end of the matter. All has been heard. Fear God and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. ¹⁴ For God will bring every work into judgment, with every hidden thing, whether it is good, or whether it is evil.